The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
ChE352 
Numerical Techniques for Chemical Engineers 
Professor Stevenson 
Lecture 12 The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
k2 > k1IVPs for springs The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
IVPs for springs 
k2 > k1
When k1 and k2 are 
very different, this 
IVP becomes 
numerically difficult The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
What happens when f(t, y) is very sensitive 
to y, so small errors in wi have a big effect? 
Common for chemical reactions, especially 
when a system has both fast & slow reactions. 
Where does exp() appear in chemistry? Stiff IVPs The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Stiff IVPs 
•When the derivatives of f grow rapidly, higher 
order methods can have INCREASING error. 
These IVPs are called stiff (after stiff springs, 
which have equations with this property). 
•Problems with e-ct in their solutions, for large c, 
are often stiff ( How is this like a spring? )
•How do we know if our IVP is stiff? 
•Stiff IVPs require tiny steps or stable methods The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Runge-Kutta-Fehlberg, RK45 
•Error bound (ε) is chosen by the user 
•Uses Runge-Kutta order 5 to estimate the 
error in a Runge-Kutta order 4 step 
○Shares some ks for efficiency 
○Only six di fferent evaluations of f per step 
○Why not just use RK6? 
•Fast, versatile, and returns correct answers 
if it returns at all: great algorithm 
•Could RK45 still be dangerous in an 
engineering situation? How? The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
•An adaptive method  uses “big” steps when f is 
well-behaved and “small” ones when it isn’t 
•For RKF45, the step size ti+1 – ti is qh, where: 
What’s ε? ~~RK45 Step Size The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
•Error for a given h is O(h5), but since the method is 
adaptive, it will shrink h to get local error below your 
user-set tolerance ε 
•RK45 uses qh to find k1 
through k5, uses those to 
get order 4 approx. (wi+1), 
calculates order 5 step 
     (ŵi+1), then calculates 
     q from h and (ŵi+1 - wi+1)
•If the steps get too small, RK45 may suffer from 
numerical errors. It may also simply run out of time. 
Reactor design 
IVP example RK45 in practice The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
One-step & explicit IVP methods 
•All methods we've seen so far (Euler, RK2, 
RK4) are explicit , one-step  methods 
•A one-step method  gives the next step yi+1 
using only the previous step yi (not yi-1 etc)
•An explicit  method is a formula for yi+1 = ... 
...How can we use a method that is 
not an explicit formula for yi+1?The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Implicit & multistep IVP methods 
•All methods we've seen so far (Euler, RK2, 
RK4) are explicit , one-step  methods 
•A one-step method  gives the next step yi+1 
using only the previous step yi (not yi-1 etc)
•An explicit method is a formula for yi+1 = ...
•Implicit methods  require solving a system of 
algebraic equations within  each step, in terms 
of f(ti+1, yi+1) & yi+1 - slow, but very reliable 
•Multistep methods  increase accuracy using 
more old steps yi-1, yi-2, etc (example: BDF) The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
For Stiff IVPs, higher RK = Bad 
•Stiff equations often have less error with low 
order methods - Why? 
•But they will still be sensitive to step size – 
needs to be “small enough” 
•For Euler, h < 2 / |c| will be stable, where c 
comes from the solution form e-ct
•Implicit methods  are the most reliable 
•Try sensitivity analysis (e.g. RK45 vs BDF) The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Solving Stiff IVPs in Python 
•Use scipy.integrate.solve_ivp 
○sol = solve_ivp(fun, (t0, tmax), [y0]) 
•If default (RK45) doesn’t work (slow, blows 
up, or has unusual oscillations), IVP is likely 
stiff. Try method='Radau' or 'BDF'. 
○sol = solve_ivp(fun, (t0, tmax), [y0], 
method='BDF') 
○Implicit multistep methods, good for stiff IVPs The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Higher-Order IVPs 
Let's say we have an mth order problem instead 
of a first order problem: we want y(t), y'(t), etc: 
•How many initial conditions do we need? 
•What is a physical example of this? 
•How could we solve this IVP? You want each of these The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Higher-Order IVPs 
Let's say we have an mth order problem instead 
of a first order problem: we want y(t), y'(t), etc: 
You want each of these 
Take advantage of the fact that each y(i)(t) is the 
derivative of the one below it y(i-1)(t), so you can 
treat this as an IVP system instead The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
mth Order IVP Example 
Now we can solve for u1 & u2We can calculate y'' if we have 
the rest, so use that as our f(t, u) Initial conditions 
Two dependent variables The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Activity: Higher Order IVPs 
5 min to do, 5 min discuss 
Set up the IVP system for the following third 
order ODE: 
State the components of u and f: 
u1, u2, . . . um
f1, f2, . . . fm
The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Answer: Higher Order IVPs 
The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Differential-Algebraic Systems 
•What if we have an IVP system containing an 
unknown , and a constraint  on the unknown? 
•How many initial conditions do we need? 
•How do we solve this IVP system? Green v 
here is new 
C C
The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Higher Order IVP example: F = ma 
●Dynamics (F = ma) is a second-order IVP 
●We want to know x(t) & v(t) 
●We have a(t) = F/m = v'(t) = x''(t) 
●If F is constant ( example? ), this is an integral 
●But usually F = f(x) or f(x, v) - examples? 
●We can solve this if we know initial position x 
and initial velocity v 
●You might see intuitively why we need initial 
conditions for both position & velocity The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Where do we get F? 
To calculate forces on a system of molecules, 
you either use quantum mechanics, or this: 
This kind of approximation is called a "force field" 
The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
https://www.kaggle.com/allaboutchemistry/xtb-water-ivp 
Where do we get F? 
To view, download the xyz 
file and open it using: 
https://molstar.org/viewer/ The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Next week: numerical linear algebra 
Pre-reading for next week: 
Matrix solvers, 
eigenvectors, & norms: 
PNM 14.1-7, 15.1 & 15.4 
More math: 
F&B 7.1-7.3, 6.2, 6.4-6.6. 
