The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
ChE352 
Numerical Techniques for Chemical Engineers 
Professor Stevenson 
Lecture 11 The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Recall: IVP Systems in Python 
from scipy.integrate  import solve_ivp 
def fun(t, u):  # 3-D IVP 
   C_A, C_B, C_C = u
   ... calculate derivatives here ... 
   return dAdt, dBdt, dCdt 
sol = solve_ivp (fun, (t0, t_final), u0) 
plt.plot(sol.t, sol.y[0], label='[A]')
plt.plot(sol.t, sol.y[1], label='[B]')
plt.plot(sol.t, sol.y[2], label='[C]')The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
•If all of the following are true, the IVP system  
is well-posed  (unique solution, bounded error 
with respect to changes in f): 
•f must be a vector function & continuous 
○What is a vector function? How is it continuous? 
•All the partial first derivatives of f must be 
continuous in all dimensions (t, u1, u2, etc.) 
•u and t must live in convex spaces 
○For any two points (t1, u1) & (t2, u2), all points on 
the line between them are also valid for the IVP 
○Example non-convex space: IVP of volatile liquids n-Dimensional "Well-Posed" IVPs The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Non-convex example IVP 
Mole fraction of component A ●Imagine solving 
an IVP for a 
reaction A ➞B 
as a liquid 
●Want CA and T 
●Between some 
good CA and T, 
you can draw a 
line where VLE 
is present (so 
you need P too) The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
●Imagine solving 
an IVP for a 
reaction A ➞B 
as a liquid 
●Want CA and T 
●Between some 
good CA and T, 
you can draw a 
line where VLE 
is present (so 
you need P too) Non-convex example IVP 
Mole fraction of component A The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Activity: define an IVP system 
Put this system, two sequential reactions with 
three species, into the general form for an IVP 
system by stating t, u, and f(t, u). Also state 
the initial conditions. How might we pick tend?The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Activity: define an IVP system 
Choice of tend depends 
on whether you’re 
modeling  or designing The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Answer: define an IVP system 
Can define f(t, u) to give a 
single vector or multiple 
scalars (same thing) 
Vector function f(t, u) 
maps R4 onto R3.
  What does this mean? The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Activity: Euler for IVP systems 
Define the Euler step  
for this system in 
terms of step size h 
(Remember, an Euler 
step is purely linear) The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Answer: Euler for IVP systems 
f(t, u) for this IVP: 
Euler step in general: 
Euler step for this IVP: 
Euler's Method for multiple dimensions is almost 
identical to Euler's Method in one dimension The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Recall: RK methods in 1D 
•RK methods use Δt, Δy, and f(t+ Δt, y+ Δy) to 
approximate the curvature  of y, permit better  
than linear  (aka better than Euler) steps 
○How are derivatives of f(t, y) related to curvature ?
•If we calculate f ' numerically, we get this 
nested expression known as RK2: 
The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Example: Euler vs RK2 
RK2 uses an 
estimate of f(t, y) at 
the midpoint  of step 
size h, instead of 
the start like Euler Even with twice 
as many steps, 
so both call 
f(t,y) equally, 
Euler can't 
catch up with 
RK2 here. Note the 
curvature  of the 
function y(t). 
This is what 
makes an IVP 
hard for Euler's 
Method. The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Recall: RK4 for 1D IVPs 
Initial 
Iterative 
step for 
tj (time) Step size h 
RK4 is 
typically 
the best 
balance 
between 
accuracy 
and cost The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
RK4 for IVP systems 
Initial 
What is the meaning of i, j, & m? The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Here is the iterative step that would be used to 
solve the previous activity's 3D IVP, using RK4 
instead of Euler, in terms of wij, kij, and h: Example IVP step with RK4 
The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Example IVP step with RK4 
(For more 
details, see F&B 
page 215-216) k1 is the Euler 
step, as always The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Example IVP step with RK4 
The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Tricky IVPs 
Simulation of the 3-body problem (an IVP) 
Errors are more likely where the forces are high... The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Getting Physics Right 
•Low error abs(yi - ytrue) is not the only goal 
•What about conservation laws? Energy, 
momentum, angular momentum... 
•Euler methods, RK4, etc are not energy  
conserving  if used to integrate equations 
of motion (as in molecular dynamics) 
•Energy-conserving methods are called 
"symplectic" (from the geometry of 
Hamiltonians, symplectic geometry) The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Symplectic Methods 
•Most popular: second-order Velocity Verlet 
•Similar "midpoint" idea to RK2 
Estimate the half-step  
velocity, then use it to 
calculate the whole step The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Symplectic Methods 
         angle  →          momentum  → 
         angle  →          momentum  →          angle  →          momentum  → 
         angle  →          momentum  → •Dynamics of a frictionless 
pendulum. Correct solutions 
are all stable over time 
(make a ring, not a spiral). 
•A method may have low 
error at every step, like 
RK45, yet have a steady 
bias in energy ( energy drift ) 
that makes it bad for 
dynamics simulations •Most popular: second-order Velocity Verlet 
•Similar "midpoint" idea to RK2 The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
IVPs of a Hamiltonian System 
The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
IVPs of a Hamiltonian System 