The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
ChE352 
Numerical Techniques for Chemical Engineers 
Professor Stevenson 
Lecture 9 The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Homework #5: groups of 2-3 
Please sort yourselves into groups of 2-3 
before the next homework, and send me the 
names (each group only has to send once) The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Classical dynamics: Asteroids 
Given an asteroid with a position, velocity, 
and forces, how does it move? 
Position = x 
 Velocity = dx/dt 
    Force = m(d2x/dt2)
If we know the initial values  of the variables, 
we can find their values at later times too 
using a form of numerical integration The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Classical dynamics: Molecules 
Given a set of atoms with positions, velocities, 
and forces, how do they move? 
Position = x 
 Velocity = d x/dt
    Force = m(d2x/dt2)
If we know the initial values  of the variables, 
we can find their values at later times too 
using a form of numerical integration 
Each atom 
has its own 
vectors x, 
d x/dt, and 
m(d2x/dt2)The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Initial Value Problems 
What is the independent  variable in f(t, y)? 
What about on this graph? WE 
HAVE 
The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
What makes it an IVP? 
•When you know how a value starts , and you 
know how it changes , but you do not know  
the values after the start 
•Classic example: predator/prey population 
–Easy to see how the derivatives are related 
•More prey ➜ more predators 
•More predators ➜ fewer prey 
–But how do these changes add up over time? 
–Example: exercise 5.7.5 (pg 221) in F&B The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Predator/prey IVP 
Either dynamic equilibrium, or both predator & 
prey go extinct, depending on IVP properties. The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Functions vs function values 
•We can use the values f (xi) without 
knowing the function f (x ) in total 
•If we only need discrete f (xi) values, an 
array such that y[i] = f (xi) is fine 
f (x ) f (x0) 
f (x1) 
f (x2) f (x3) f (x4) 
x0 x1 x2 x3 x4The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Example: Styrene Reactor Design 
•Scenario: you’re a chemical engineer for a 
company that makes styrofoam 
•You notice a shortage of styrene  ("S"), the 
monomer of styrofoam, so you want to make 
it from ethylbenzene  
("EB"), a cheap oil 
refinery byproduct, 
instead of buying it 
What do you call this kind of reaction? The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Simplified reactor equations 
What variables here give the yield of S? 
Can we solve for yield analytically? 
What aspects of reality are missing? 
1st order 2nd order First you would need to calculate the yield of S as 
a function of distance & reactor length (z, v) The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
More realistic equations: 𝜌 varies 
Still doesn’t account for temperature change, side 
products (benzene and toluene), coking... 
Can we solve this analytically? 
The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
“Well-posed” IVPs 
•An IVP (in 1D) is well-posed if: 
and f, df are continuous for all relevant t & y: 
•A well-posed IVP has a unique solution y(t) 
•Opposite is ill-posed  (no unique solution) initial condition The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Activity: Well-posed IVPs 
Then, check whether your IVP meets the 
conditions for having a unique solution. 
(Why do we care that the solution is unique?) 
Standard 
form of 
an IVP 
Styrene 
synthesis 
reaction 
(irreversible) State the problem below in the standard 
form of an IVP (aka: define y, t, f, a, and 𝜶)The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Answer: Well-posed IVPs 
IVP is well-posed and has a unique solution 
The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Error bounds for well-posed IVPs 
Then the difference (error) between z(t) and y(t) 
is always proportional to the size of δ(t) 
Why does that help us? A well-posed IVP solution y can be approximated 
with bounded error . If we define a perturbed  
problem  z using the same function f(t, y): The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
How do we solve IVPs? 
1st-order Taylor expansion of y at point ti:
If we define a step size h = (ti+1– ti) and 
evaluate at a nearby point ti+1:
Estimate a small step with a Taylor series! 
What order is 
the error for 
solution y(b)? The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Euler’s Method 
•Dropping the error term (proportional to h2):
•Define a variable w for our approximation: 
•Simplifying notation: 
•"Asteroids" code: 
x += dt * x_speed 
x_speed += dt * x_acceleration The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
①Stock price IVPs  ②???  ③Profit 
●Do not pick individual stocks unless you 
have money to set on fire 
●Those who do bet on stock prices (like 
hedge funds) do it with IVPs 
●Typical model: the Black-Scholes  equation 
S is the stock price, V is the price of an option  to buy 
the stock at a future time, r is the risk-free interest 
rate, σ is the volatility  of the stock price, t is time 
The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
①Stock price IVPs  ②???  ③Profit 
Black-Scholes assumes that 
prices follow Brownian Motion  
(also used to model molecular 
dynamics with a PRNG) Volatility σ is higher for 
smaller companies, so 
prices tend to have lower 
lows & higher highs The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art 
Valentine's Math: PRNG Secrets 
●Pseudo-Random Number Generator 
●The output of a PRNG is repeatable as 
long as it has the same state (aka seed )
●If you and another person share a secret, 
you can each use it to seed a PRNG, 
giving identical  random-looking outputs 
●This lets you share secret messages 
●https://www.kaggle.com/allaboutchemistry/
prng-encryption 